Docs: Create procedure for Deploying Quarkus applications compiled to native executables based (#45986)
quarkusio/quarkus: docs/src/main/asciidoc/deploying-to-openshift-native-howto.adoc

:extensions: io.quarkus:quarkus-openshift

You can deploy your native {project-name} applications to {openshift} compiled to native executables by using the Docker build strategy.

You must create a native executable for your application that targets the Linux AMD64 operating system.
If your host operating system is different from this, create a native Linux executable by using a container runtime, for example, Docker or Podman.

Your Quarkus project includes pregenerated Dockerfiles with instructions.
To use a custom Dockerfile, add the file in the `src/main/docker` directory or anywhere inside the module, and set the path to your Dockerfile by using the `quarkus.openshift.native-dockerfile` property.

== Prerequisites

* You have a Linux AMD64 system or an Open Container Initiative (OCI) compatible container runtime, such as Podman or Docker.
* You have a Quarkus Maven project that includes the `quarkus-openshift` extension.
* You are working in the correct OpenShift project namespace.

== Procedure

. Set the Docker build strategy in your `application.properties` configuration file:
+
[source, properties]
----
quarkus.openshift.build-strategy=docker
----

> . Set the container runtime:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Enable container-based native builds:
```

> . Set the container runtime:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Enable container-based native builds:
```

+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.native.container-build=true
----
. Optional: Set the following properties in the `application.properties` file, as required by your environment:

> .. If you are using an untrusted certificate, configure the `KubernetesClient` property:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Trust untrusted certificates:
```

+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.kubernetes-client.trust-certs=true
----

> .. Expose the service to create an {openshift} route:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
.. Enable access to your application from outside the cluster by exposing an {openshift} route:
```

+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.openshift.route.expose=true
----
.. Set the path to your custom Dockerfile:
+
[source,properties,subs="attributes+,+quotes"]
----
quarkus.openshift.native-dockerfile=<path_to_your_dockerfile>
----
The following example shows the path to the `Dockerfile.custom-native`:
+
[source,properties]
----

> quarkus.openshift.jvm-dockerfile=src/main/docker/Dockerfile.custom-native

Reviewer: Why does this example show `jvm-dockerfile` instead of `native-dockerfile`? Is `native-dockerfile` a placeholder and `jvm-dockerfile` an actual value?

Author: Good catch. Think this should be _quarkus.openshift.native-dockerfile_=src/main/docker/Dockerfile.custom-native. @iocanel, can you please confirm this?

----
.. Specify the container engine:
** To build a native executable with Podman:
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.native.container-runtime=podman
----
** To build a native executable with Docker:
+
[source,properties]
----
quarkus.native.container-runtime=docker
----

> . Finally, build a native executable, package, and deploy your application to {openshift}:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Finally, build the native executable, package it, and deploy your application to {openshift}:
```

+
[source,shell,subs="attributes+,+quotes"]
----
./mvnw clean package -Pnative -Dquarkus.openshift.deploy=true
----

== Verification

> . Verify that an image stream and a service resource is created and the application is deployed by using the OpenShift web console.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. Verify that an image stream and a service resource are created, and that the application is deployed.
```

> Alternatively, you can run the following {openshift} command-line interface (CLI) commands:

Reviewer: Use the {openshift} web console or the following {openshift} command-line interface (CLI) commands:

+
[source,shell,subs="attributes+,+quotes"]
----
oc get is <1>
oc get pods <2>
oc get svc <3>
----
<1> List the image streams created.

> <2> View a list of pods associated with your current OpenShift project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<2> List the running pods.
```

Author: Updated to "List the pods associated with your current OpenShift project."

> <3> Get the list of Kubernetes services.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<3> List the Kubernetes services.
```

[start=2]

> . To retrieve the log output for your application's pod, enter the following command where `__<pod_name>__` is the name of the latest pod prefixed with the name of your application:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
. To retrieve the log output for your application's pod,  run the following command, replacing __<pod_name>__ with the name of the latest pod prefixed by your application name:
```
